---
slug: fall-of-kabul
title: Fall of Kabul (Ode to a battlespace)
description: Cybernetics is often thought of as a grim military or industrial science of control.
  But, as Andrew Pickering reveals in his book The Cybernetic Brain, and Đorđe Grbić explores in this text, it is much more than that.
  Cybernetics is a science.
date: 2021-08-15T13:50:44.015Z
---
The fall of Kabul marks the end of an epoch of western interventionism in the dawning years of the 21st century. Media outlets are rampant with comparisons to the fall of Saigon1 at the end of the Vietnam conflict, but US spokespersons have declared this to eminently and definitely be nothing like Saigon2. This while images of afghans attempting to flee by boarding the outside of airplanes flood the internet. I think the comparison to Saigon is particularly apt. Western postwar interventionism denotes an extremely interesting point in military history development, for the first time ever, the strong cannot defeat the weak. David’s Sling (although now onymous for the next gen iron dome missile defense system over Israel, which is about as far from the weak casting a stone at the strong as we can get) seems an apt metaphor for the strategic and tactical dexterity with which “the man in the black pyjamas” has in both the cases of Vietnam and Afghanistan, outwitted and outlasted the lumbering warmachine behemoths of the invaders.
In both cases, the US invaded with an ideologically clear but practically abstract goal to curb terrorism/communism. Both times they deployed the truly awesome weight of their incredibly sophisticated military. This force displayed to the world the terrifying military capabilities, in conventional warfare, of an A rate power, in the first and second invasions of Iraq. Here the conventional forces of the Iraqi republic under Saddam were completely outmaneuvered on the strategic map, as well as outgunned on a tactical level. For a regular infantryman, fighting the speedy mechanized American divisions must have been like fighting ghosts. Screaming banshees could appear in the sky with obliterating firepower at any moment, while the mechanized divisions could completely bypass defenses on the strategic map. How then, could this awesome invasion force, which so handily and effortlessly defeated amassed, trained and organized ground forces, be defeated by handfuls of insurgents in Afghanistan?
At the inflection point at which conflict becomes sedentary, and velocity over open ground is no longer an imperative or condition necessary for military success, the logic of the battlefield is inverted. The mechanized divisions which could move so freely in a conventional war of frontlines and amassed troops, are now slow and incredibly visible in the landscape. Temporality and the paradigms of vision have changed.


Now the Afghan farmer can be Taleban by night. At the same time, in this battlespace epoch of post-total war, the directionality of war-effort PR is reversed. In the two major conflicts of the last century, propaganda was primarily aimed at one’s own population, inciting the purchase of war bonds, and ensuring a continual stream of conscripts, while this remains true in postmodern asymmetrical conflicts (Public opinion as indeed being a main factor in the US’ decision to withdraw from Vietnam), these are further complicated by the fact that their sole condition for victory (wincon) is to promulgate or breed sense of nationhood, adherence to western ideals, and the internal stability and loyalty and organization necessary to maintain stable governance. 
In Afghanistan then, a main feature of the battlespace (a battlefield where temporal and spatial interrelations become muddled) was the opinion of the local population towards coalition ground troops. Manipulating this opinion, a slow skewing of the scales in one's own direction, became a parameter upon which unit formations and the deployment of weapon systems had to orient themselves for parties on both sides of the conflict. To navigate the semiotics of this new battlespace, division or squad level embedded translators became vital for units at both a tactical and a strategic level. An AO (Area of Operation) exists now not only as topology, penetrability, and enemy density in the landscape but also in the desires, trust networks, docility/hostility and beliefs (especially about the strength and likelihood of victory of combatant groups) of those enmeshed in that battlespace. 
“...The reason is that command-by-plan inherently fights the disorderly nature of war as much as the adversary. It is a futile quest to will order upon chaos”3
War is incredibly messy, on all levels, it is messy for the humans involved on a ground level as well as for war planners to making contingency plans. 
The invasions of Iraq were, at least at the onset of both those conflicts, modern conflicts of two nation states fighting war in a relatively conventional manner. This stopped being true the moment the regime fell. America can beat any land army it would realistically deploy against, but the 21st century missions of this military have been ones of COIN (Counter Insurgency) and soft projections of power in assistance of “nation-building”. To send high-school dropouts and suddenly expect them to be not just grunts, but at once, policemen, diplomats, peacekeepers, and proponents of an alien western liberalism to the people of mountainous Afghanistan seems doomed from the onset.
Afghanistan has a long history of repelling foreign invaders, and it has been site for geopolitics for most of recent history. Does it then come as a surprise that the Mujahedeen, who were trained and equipped by one ominous three letter agency to fight the soviets in the late eighties, have proven to be exceptionally adaptable and capable fighters, and defenders of their faith against the infidel invaders? These mountain men who earned the moniker Dukhi (spirits/ghosts) from their soviet adversaries now again control a country and the future livelihoods of 18 million people rest in their hands.
A small part of me can’t help but empathize with the Taleban, for 20 years they have struggled and resisted, quietly and methodically, a militarily superior adversary. The Americans, who in the latter part of the war, would very rarely even get in long range skirmishes with the Taleban, experienced their presence mostly by sudden explosions appearing in every place ventured. 
Reza Negarestani uses the term “mechanical dread”4 to describe these impersonal weapon systems that are deployed and then go off without further human intervention, maiming and killing indiscriminately. Thusly desecrated ground for which no apotropaic exists except serious ordinance clearing equipment, serves as a grim reminder for the slogging grunt that this country does not want him here. The land itself becomes charged with antipathy towards foreigners. It is no surprise then, that the men who return to their western homeland, to a populace that is neither heavily invested nor supportive of the conflict or mission, who may have seen horrible things done to their comrades or civilians, with their vengeant bloodlust unsated, with any notions of gallantry in combat blackly dashed, that these men return as broken revenants. That the mechanical dread pervades them, their neural architecture now totally saturated with the logics of survival, with situational awareness, with “operational instinct” as one tobacco chewing American commander called it, when rousing his troops for an offensive against the Taleban5.
This mechanical dread also lingers in the minds of  the population of those areas, even after they have left. To a child in Waziristan the gray cover of clouds denotes a blanketing safety from the menacing gaze of invisible machines that mean you harm. While the sight of clear blue sky holds a threatening aspect. It means that the cold metal agents of the will of faraway nations can see and kill you with impunity.
The US have pulled their troops, the 300.000 man strong afghan army melted away like the snows of yesterday before the white flagged hosts of Allah. Although the US will get most of their own personnel (meaning definitely everyone white) out, they have left behind thousands of translators and others who provided auxiliary services to the american warmachine, the fate of these people, who believed enough in the mission to risk their lives for a brighter future for their country is now extremely uncertain, many may already have met gruesome deaths.
What is in store now for the academics, the western collaborators and the women and girls of Afghanistan in the coming years is hard to tell. The official and outward line of the Taleban is that of a more moderate and modern interpretation of Sharia than when they were last in power. There are however serious doubts as to how much this will be the case once the Taleban consolidate control over the country and its infrastructure. The UN appeals with all their airy6 humanitarianism to respect the universal rights of all people, seem at once endearingly idealist and laughably ineffectual.
Although the systems that start and sustain wars are too complex and multifoliate to enumerate, public will as amplified in media sentiment does hold some sway on foreign policy. The reasoning of “we’ve been here for 20 years, what more can we do?" casts the instability in Afghanistan as an essentially domestic issue rather than a product of colonial rule, regional instability and international conflicts fought on afghan soil. American interventionism is cast as a form of charity, wherein any causality of terror is repudiated. America accepts no liability.
The population, by their actions, certainly seem terrified of the prospect of life in a Taleban state. The chilling images of men hanging on to the outside of American C-70‘s taking off of Kabul airport, attest the desperation with which people want to escape. Fingers getting numb from the vibrations, cold, and the air rushing past, hard to breathe, bone rattling vibrations, finally separation, weightlessness, the plane gets instantly distant, the motif reminiscent of the people who chose to jump from the world trade center, rather to meet their end at the unrelenting certainty of gravity than endure the terrible nerve singing immolation that staying entailed.
What eerie symmetry, that this conflict would end, and begin, with the image of man falling from the sky.







1:https://www.republicanleader.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/mcconnell-on-bidens-afghanistan-collapse-the-embarrassment-of-a-superpower-laid-low

2: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/aug/15/antony-blinken-us-mission-afghanistan-saigon

3:https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA467439.pdfJoint Synthetic Battlespace: Cornerstone for Predictive Battlespace Awareness By Dr. Paul W. Phister, Jr., Dr. Timothy Busch and Igor G. Plonisch Air Force Research Laboratory/Information Directorate 26

4:Cyclonopedia by Reza Negarestani, p 136

5: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vj2PMLbZjw&t=35s Speech by Cpt. Ryan B. Cohen

6: "complicated airflow"
